========================
Import Systems & Modules
========================

As with any coding language, we need the ability to work
with multiple files, modules, and use standard and external libraries. Controlling
the namespace therefore becomes important to defining access to other code.

Imagine we have a Python or Rust Package, with the given project structure:

.. code-block:: text

    ExampleProject/
    ├── {pyproject | cargo}.toml
    └── src/
        ├── __init__.py
        ├── main.{py | rs}
        ├── subDirectoryA/
        │   ├── __init__.py | mod.rs
        │   └── file_a.{py | rs}
        └── subDirectoryB/
            ├── __init__.py | mod.rs
            └── file_b.{py | rs}

In python we could access information in file_a from the main file in the root directory, as shown:

.. code-block:: python

    # subDirectoryA.file_a.py contents:
    def fancy_function():
        print("I is a Fancy Function A")

    # main.py contents:
    from ExampleProject.subDirectoryA import file_a

    file_a.fancy_function()

And in rust, it would be accessed as shown:

.. code-block:: text
    // subDirectoryA.mod.rs contents:
    pub mod file_a;

    // subDirectoryA.file_a.rs contents:
    pub fn fancy_function() {
        println!("I is a Fancy Function A")
    }

    // main.rs contents:
    mod subDirectoryA;
    use ExampleProject::subDirectoryA::file_a;

    file_a::fancy_function()


A Comparison between Rust and Python Import and Namespace Systems
=================================================================
We provide a table for convenience to compare and highlight differences in jargon, syntax, features,
and control of the namespace and import systems.

.. table::
   :widths: auto

   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
   | Properties     | Rust                                     | Python                        | 
   +================+==========================================+===============================+
   | Package        | Crates                                   | Package                       |
   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
   | Files          | Modules                                  | Modules                       |
   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
   | Modules        | Declared using `mod` keyword             | Files                         |
   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
   | Visibility     | Modules are Private by Default           | Everything is Public (__all__)|
   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
   | Dependencies   | Gloablly Available without importing     | Must Be imported where used   | 
   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
   | Aliasing       | Yes: `as` keyword syntax                 | Yes: `as` keyword syntax      |
   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
   | External Libs  | Yes: `extern use` keyword syntax         | *Yes: `import` keyword syntax |
   +----------------+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------+


Python: Properties of the Import System
---------------------------------------
1. Files are Modules (1:1), which compose the Package.
2. All Objects within modules are Public (i.e. accessible via importing).
    A. Methods and variables named with a leading underscore, are generally considered private, but there is no mechanism to stop the user from actually doing so.
    B. The Special Method \__all__ can be used to control what is exported from a module, when a user imports like so: `from package.module import *`, but does not limit access when the module itself is imported routinely: `import package.module`.
    C. Nested objects are effectively private because they are not within an accessible namespace (e.g. code nested within a function block).
3. Dependecies must be imported into to every module (file) that needs to use them.
4. Imports can be aliased, using the `as` keyword syntax: `import package.module as alias`


Rust: Properties of the Import System
-------------------------------------
1. Rust Projects are called `Crates` which is comprised of Modules.
2. Files are Modules, but not exclusively.
    A. Modules are declared within files by the developer via the `mod` keyword, to define contained namespaces.
    B. Other Files can be declared as modules from another file via the `mod` keyword.
3. Modules are private by default, unless otherwise made public using the `pub` keyword.
4. Crate Dependencies (declared within the cargo.toml) are globally available, and do not need to be imported to be used.
5. Imports can be aliased, using the `as` keyword syntax: `use crate::name as alias`


Compiling a Rust Crate: The Search Path
=======================================
Since python is not a compiled language, we will only look at Rust here:

1. Compiler searches for the Crate Root (src/main.rs)
2. If a Module is declared at the Crate Root, we search:
    A. inline (the module may be defined here within curly braces)
    B. File within Crate Root (src/module_name.rs)
    C. File within Directory in Crate Root (src/module_name/mod.rs)
3. Submodules: Modules declared outside of the Crate Root (src/main.rs), search:
    A. inline (the module may be defined here within curly braces)
    B. File From File Root (src/file_name/module_name.rs)
    C. File within Directory in File Root (src/file_name/module_name/mod.rs)

This recursive process helps glob what files (and modules) are needed during compilation.
Each Object within this path is hashed using DefPathHash during construction of the High Level IR.
